Policies for adding new datasets to the SGID (#1506)
agrc/gis.utah.gov: about/policy/sgid/index.md

date: 2019-12-04 10:01:27 -0500
---

> The following policies apply to data in the internal SGID Enterprise Geodatabase.

Reviewer: this might be a good spot to explain (maybe 2 sentences) what the sgid is.  i'll see if i can come up with something that we can hash out. 
the definition of the sgid evolves as technology evolves.  in my mind, the current sgid could be composed of (1.) what's in the Open Data SGID (the curated stuff that you describe on this page) and (2.) what's in the sgid index - which might be more like a state of utah gis data catalog with both items in the Open SGID as well as pointers to items that might be of interest, but do not meet our guidelines laid out here on this page.

Author: I just pushed a commit with some verbiage. 

I think the full explanation of the differences between the internal SGID, the OpenSGID, ArcGIS Online, and Open Data would be a great candidate for the /gis-data-sharing page. I think we should keep this page focused on the internal SGID and only mention the others when describing how/when data is copied to them from the internal SGID.

Reviewer: _[here's a fist shot at it.  it needs some refining.  see what you can do]_

The SGID is composed of both curated and non-curated data. The policies outlined on this page focus on curated data.

_(maybe additional info like this can be displayed below the above statement, but less prominent - italic or a side note)_ 
The entire SGID can be explored using AGRC's SGID search index. Additionally, curated data is found on AGRC's data pages, and is hosted on AGRC's Open Data site and/or Open SGID database.

Reviewer: i totally agree about the data page being the place for the full explanation.

Author: See #1508 for changes to the data page that explain the different facets of the SGID.

> The following policies apply to data in the internal SGID geodatabase, which is a curated database of state-wide datasets. It is maintained as an internal, AGRC-only Esri Enterprise Geodatabase and is available to everyone as the cloud-hosted, PostGIS-backed [OpenSGID]({% link sgid/open-sgid/index.md %}). The contents of the SGID are also uploaded to the Utah SGID groups of our [ArcGIS Online Organization](https://utah.maps.arcgis.com).

Reviewer 2: **thought**: I think of the SGID as the open sgid, open data, and gis website. I don't think we need to describe the open sgid as a cloud hosted yada yada as that is an implementation detail. I don't think we really promote arcgis online as open data is the "curated" list of agol items.

```suggestion
The following policies apply to data in the internal SGID geodatabase, which is a curated database of state-wide datasets. It is maintained as an internal, AGRC-only Esri Enterprise Geodatabase and is available to everyone as the [OpenSGID]({% link sgid/open-sgid/index.md %}) and [Open Data](https://opendata.gis.utah.gov).
```

Author: I guess I wanted to toot the open source horn of the OpenSGID, but you're right, it's cleaner without it.

I'm working under the idea that this policy refers primarily to things in the internal SGID. Because AGOL and Open Data are both supersets of the internal SGID, I'm trying to narrow that last sentence down to just refer to the Utah SGID groups in AGOL... though now that I think about it, that distinction breaks down as soon as someone shares their external data to one of those groups to get it in Open Data. 

Perhaps we change the last line to "available to everyone as the OpenSGID and as part of our Open Data site"?

Reviewer 2: let's try that. I updated the suggestion.

> ## Adding New Datasets to the SGID

Reviewer 2: **thought**: what about generalizing this to talk about the SGID and not just adding data to it?
```suggestion
## SGID Data
```

{: .text-left }

> We strive to achieve and maintain a high standard of quality for the SGID. One of the best ways to do this is making sure all datasets coming into the SGID are high-quality datasets. We use the following policies and procedures to guide this effort.

Reviewer: the sentence below could be removed and the concept would still hold: 
"One of the best ways to do this is making sure all datasets coming into the SGID are high-quality datasets"

### Qualifying Datasets
{: .text-left }

> Datasets requested to be added to the SGID by a state or local agency or organization should meet all the following criteria:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Datasets should meet all the following criteria:
```

Author: I was thinking we should leave this narrow and specific to new requests so that the theoretical arguer doesn't claim "well, existing datasets x, y, and z don't meet these, so why won't you accept my new dataset q?" 

Is this too paranoid?

Reviewer 2: I like the shorter sentence. I hope no one will feel the need to argue and if they do we can put them in timeout.

> - The dataset should cover a **state-wide** geographic extent, be part of a state-wide project or initiative (such as roads, address points, and parcels), or be relevant to broader projects or mandates that have a state-wide interest (hazard mapping or endangered species mapping).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The dataset should cover a **state-wide** geographic extent, be part of a state-wide project or initiative (such as roads, address points, and parcels), or be relevant to broader projects or mandates that have a state-wide interest (e.g. geologic hazard mapping or endangered species mapping).
```

> - The dataset should be useful to the daily activities of **multiple agencies** or organizations. Datasets primarily used internally by a single agency don't belong in the SGID.

Author: I updated it to incorporate Steve's suggestion, which I think covers the same idea as yours.

- The entity providing the dataset should be the **authoritative** or original source (for example, a county's parcels must come from the County government).

> - The entity providing the dataset does not have the **ability** to publicly share data (such as an existing ArcGIS Online organization). An entity's data storage costs or server capacity may not be sufficient justification for adding data to the SGID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The entity providing the dataset does not have the **ability** to publicly host the data within their organization (such as an existing ArcGIS Online organization). An entity's data storage costs or server capacity may not be sufficient justification for adding data to the SGID.
```

Reviewer: I like this bullet point a lot (it encourages the new model where you host we catalog).  but, again, i think this might be confusing unless we define what the sgid is.  hopefully, the first few sentences of this page can define that.  b/c we are saying here we will bring it into Internal/OpenData/OpenSGID if you can't host your data, but if you can host it, and the other criteria are met, then it can be added to OpenData but you host it.  it's tricky.

Reviewer 2: Your suggestion to explain what the SGID is now will be driven home by this if we mention that it is distributed and we are the index or something similar.

Author: I like the distinction between host and share, but I updated the wording to avoid using organization repetitively. Let me know what you think.

Reviewer 2: I think i like share more than host since sharing includes agol and portal while hosting might imply not using the cloud?

Author: `does not have the internal **capability** to publicly serve the data (such as through an existing ArcGIS Online organization)`?

Reviewer: nice!  like it.  ...share or host both work for me.

Reviewer: ship it!

> We will periodically review the SGID for datasets that no longer meet these criteria. Specifically, we may consider removing datasets that see little to no usage for a prolonged period of time.
> 
> You can still share datasets that don't meet the guidelines above with our [Open Data site](https://opendata.gis.utah.gov/). This is a great way to share data mainly intended for the general public with a wide audience. Please see our [Open Data sharing guidelines]({%link gis-data-sharing/open-data/index.md %}) for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can still share datasets that don't meet the guidelines above with our [Open Data site](https://opendata.gis.utah.gov/). This is a great way to share data mainly intended for the general public with a wide audience. Please see our [Open Data sharing guidelines]({%link gis-data-sharing/open-data/index.md %}) for more information.

We will periodically review the SGID for datasets that no longer meet these criteria. Specifically, we may consider removing datasets that see little to no usage for a prolonged period of time.
```

Reviewer: i just switched these paragraphs

> You can still share datasets that don't meet the guidelines above with our [Open Data site](https://opendata.gis.utah.gov/). This is a great way to share data mainly intended for the general public with a wide audience. Please see our [Open Data sharing guidelines]({%link gis-data-sharing/open-data/index.md %}) for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Datasets can still be shared that don't meet the guidelines above with our [Open Data site](https://opendata.gis.utah.gov/). This is a great way to share data mainly intended for the general public with a wide audience. Please see our [Open Data sharing guidelines]({%link gis-data-sharing/open-data/index.md %}) for more information.
```

Author: I think this suggestion veers us back into passive voice. I think staying in active voice keeps the tone from being too officious or legalistic.

Reviewer 2: OK, i was trying to replace the use of `you`

Author: Maybe "entities" or "agencies and organizations" instead?

Reviewer 2: sure let's try that

### Dataset Introduction Process
{: .text-left }

> We use the [Porter](https://github.com/agrc/porter) project to outline and track the steps needed to add data to the SGID. A brief overview of these steps is included below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We use the [Porter](https://github.com/agrc/porter) project to guide and track the steps needed to add, remove, or change schema data contained in the SGID. A brief overview of these steps is included below.
```

> We will use the [Porter](https://github.com/agrc/porter) project to guide and track the steps needed to add or make breaking changes (remove, schema change, etc) to products contained in the SGID. A brief overview of these steps is included below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We will use the [Porter](https://github.com/agrc/porter) project to guide and track the steps needed to add or make breaking changes (remove, schema change, etc.) to products contained in the SGID. A brief overview of these steps is included below.
```

We will periodically review the SGID for datasets that no longer meet these criteria. Specifically, we may consider removing datasets that see little to no usage for a prolonged period of time.

### Dataset Introduction Process
{: .text-left }

We will use the [Porter](https://github.com/agrc/porter) project to guide and track the steps needed to add or make breaking changes (remove, schema change, etc.) to products contained in the SGID. A brief overview of these steps is included below.

We will add a corresponding record to the [Data Stewardship spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/11ASS7LnxgpnD0jN4utzklREgMf1pcvYjcXcIcESHweQ/edit#gid=1). This will contain at a minimum:

- The authoritative access from location
- The table name
- A description
- The data steward
- The steward contact name and email
- A link to the data page on the AGRC website
- A link to the SGID Open Data page

> We will create a hosted feature service of the dataset in our ArcGIS Online organization. The ArcGIS Online item for this feature service will reside in the corresponding ISO category folder and group and contain the appropriate tags. If the dataset is authoritative, it will be marked as `authoritative`.

Reviewer 2: remove ISO mention
```suggestion
We will create a hosted feature service of the dataset in our ArcGIS Online organization. The ArcGIS Online item for this feature service will reside in the corresponding category folder and group and contain the appropriate tags. If the dataset is authoritative, it will be marked as `authoritative`.
```

The [Auditor](https://github.com/agrc/auditor) project will regularly synchronize the ArcGIS Online item's information (tags, thumbnail, title, metadata, etc.) with information from the SGID geodatabase to ensure consistency across all our platforms.

If the dataset is shared with our [Open Data site](https://opendata.gis.utah.gov/), we will enable the multiple formats download option on the ArcGIS Online item page to allow users to download File Geodatabases and other non-default download options.

> We will populate the [minimum metadata content]({% link about/policy/metadata/index.md %}) in the SGID geodatabase. We recommended that you use the [metadata form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1u7gwdmRN-83Kh5zizi-kHRObeoNyaakM3scPkLT3zKY/edit) to create new metadata for the SGID.

Reviewer 2: remove the you
```suggestion
We will populate the [minimum metadata content]({% link about/policy/metadata/index.md %}) in the SGID geodatabase. We recommended using the [metadata form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1u7gwdmRN-83Kh5zizi-kHRObeoNyaakM3scPkLT3zKY/edit) to create new metadata for the SGID.
```

> The domain values for any new database domains must match their corresponding descriptions. See the [domain document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/12bdtmtv-ZVF9g-lFshbobx8DbKX9LfbL44HawLjFTVw/edit?usp=sharing) for more information on this effort.

Reviewer 2: **suggestion**: reword sentence
```suggestion
The domain values for any new coded value domain must match their corresponding descriptions. Read about this effort in the [improving data clarity with domains](https://docs.google.com/document/d/12bdtmtv-ZVF9g-lFshbobx8DbKX9LfbL44HawLjFTVw/edit?usp=sharing) document.
```

We will use [Sweeper](https://github.com/agrc/sweeper) (or some other form of automation) to remove all empty or invalid geometries and duplicate records.

The SGID uses the ESRI default Resolution and Tolerance:

- XY Resolution: 0.0001 Meter
- XY Tolerance: 0.001 Meter

### Open SGID
{: .text-left }

All datasets in the SGID geodatabase are synced nightly with the [Open SGID]({% link sgid/open-sgid/index.md %}). This open-standards-centric database is accessible to anyone with an internet connection.

### Dates in Table Names
{: .text-left }

> Dates are acceptable in table names when content belongs in either the `census`, `political`, or `tax` ISO categories to identify datasets where the most current data may not reflect the current calendar year. For all other categories, dates should only be used for tables that are no longer effective/active or soon-to-be effective/active. This implies that the **most current and relevant** data contains **no date suffix**. Historical or future data _will_ contain a date suffix to help identification at a glance. The best way to learn about a dataset is to view the data page metadata.

Reviewer 2: remove ISO mention
```suggestion
Dates are acceptable in table names when content belongs in either the `census`, `political`, or `tax categories to identify datasets where the most current data may not reflect the current calendar year. For all other categories, dates should only be used for tables that are no longer effective/active or soon-to-be effective/active. This implies that the **most current and relevant** data contains **no date suffix**. Historical or future data _will_ contain a date suffix to help identification at a glance. The best way to learn about a dataset is to view the data page metadata.
```

Agencies and organizations can still share datasets that don't meet the guidelines above with our [Open Data site](https://opendata.gis.utah.gov/). This is a great way to share data mainly intended for the general public with a wide audience. Please see our [Open Data sharing guidelines]({%link gis-data-sharing/open-data/index.md %}) for more information.

We will periodically review the SGID for datasets that no longer meet these criteria. Specifically, we may consider removing datasets that see little to no usage for a prolonged period of time.

### Dataset Introduction Process
{: .text-left }

We will use the [Porter](https://github.com/agrc/porter) project to guide and track the steps needed to add or make breaking changes (remove, schema change, etc.) to products contained in the SGID. A brief overview of these steps is included below.

We will add a corresponding record to the [Data Stewardship spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/11ASS7LnxgpnD0jN4utzklREgMf1pcvYjcXcIcESHweQ/edit#gid=1). This will contain at a minimum:

- The authoritative access from location
- The table name
- A description
- The data steward
- The steward contact name and email

> - A link on the data page on the AGRC website

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- A link to the data page on the AGRC website
```
Since we're talking about the spreadsheet here, this should be a link 'to' the data page of the website.

We also might need to more clearly label the columns of the spreadsheet that pertain to these bullets (Source --> Steward, Website URL, Endpoint, etc.)

Reviewer 2: Lets coordinate any spreadsheet column name changes as quite a few automation tools depend on those.

> - A link the the data page on the AGRC website

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A link to the data page on the AGRC website
```

Reviewer 3: I think I got that wrong. Should be "A link **on** the data page..." ?

Reviewer 2: go ahead and edit your suggestion. I'll delete your comment.

- A link to the SGID Open Data page

> We will create a hosted feature service of the dataset in our ArcGIS Online organization. The ArcGIS Online item for this feature service will reside in the corresponding ISO category folder and contain the appropriate tags. If the dataset is authoritative, it will be marked as `authoritative`. We don't anticipate some datasets ever receiving updates, such as the boundary lines for adjacent counties in the surrounding states. These datasets will only exist in ArcGIS Online and will be tagged as `static`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We will create a hosted feature service of the dataset in our ArcGIS Online organization. The ArcGIS Online item for this feature service will reside in the corresponding ISO category folder and contain the appropriate tags. If the dataset is authoritative, it will be marked as `authoritative`. We anticipate some datasets won't receive future updates, such as the boundary lines for adjacent counties in the surrounding states. These datasets will only exist in ArcGIS Online and will be tagged as `static`.
```

Reviewer 2: i enjoy this rewording. i had to read that sentence twice to make it compute.

Author: Agreed! I was struggling writing that sentence.

> The [Auditor](https://github.com/agrc/auditor) project will regularly evaluate and update the ArcGIS Online item's information (tags, thumbnail, title, etc) based off of information from a separate table and from the SGID. It will also update the ArcGIS Online item's metadata from the SGID's geodatabase.

Reviewer 2: **thought**: this might be an implementation detail that isn't important to readers.

Author: Yeah, I see what you're saying. I'll revisit this.

> The [Auditor](https://github.com/agrc/auditor) project will regularly evaluate and update the ArcGIS Online item's information (tags, thumbnail, title, etc) based off of information from a separate table and from the SGID. It will also update the ArcGIS Online item's metadata from the SGID's geodatabase.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The [Auditor](https://github.com/agrc/auditor) project will regularly evaluate and update the ArcGIS Online item's information (tags, thumbnail, title, etc.) based on information contained in a separate table, and from the internal SGID geodatabase. It will also update the ArcGIS Online item's metadata from the SGID geodatabase.
```

> If the dataset is shared with our [Open Data site](https://opendata.gis.utah.gov/), we will enable the multiple formats download option in the ArcGIS Online item page to allow users to download File Geodatabases and other non default download options.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If the dataset is shared with our [Open Data site](https://opendata.gis.utah.gov/), we will enable the multiple formats download option in the ArcGIS Online item page to allow users to download File Geodatabases and other non-default download options.
```

> If the dataset is shared with our [Open Data site](https://opendata.gis.utah.gov/), we will enable the multiple formats download option in the ArcGIS Online item page to allow users to download File Geodatabases and other non-default download options.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the dataset is shared with our [Open Data site](https://opendata.gis.utah.gov/), we will enable the multiple formats download option on the ArcGIS Online item page to allow users to download File Geodatabases and other non-default download options.
```

We will populate the [minimum metadata content]({% link about/policy/metadata/index.md %}) in the SGID geodatabase. We recommended that you use the [metadata form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1u7gwdmRN-83Kh5zizi-kHRObeoNyaakM3scPkLT3zKY/edit) to create new metadata for the SGID.

> The domain values for any new database domains must match domain their descriptions. See the [domain document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/12bdtmtv-ZVF9g-lFshbobx8DbKX9LfbL44HawLjFTVw/edit?usp=sharing) for more information on this effort.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The domain values for any new database domains must match their corresponding descriptions. See the [domain document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/12bdtmtv-ZVF9g-lFshbobx8DbKX9LfbL44HawLjFTVw/edit?usp=sharing) for more information on this effort.
```

> We will use [Sweeper](https://github.com/agrc/sweeper) (or some other form of automation) to remove all empty geometries and duplicate records.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use [Sweeper](https://github.com/agrc/sweeper) (or some other form of automation) to remove all empty geometries and duplicate records.
```

Author: I'm going to discard this suggestion because everything else in this section uses the "We will ..." pattern.

> We will use [Sweeper](https://github.com/agrc/sweeper) (or some other form of automation) to remove all empty geometries and duplicate records.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We will use [Sweeper](https://github.com/agrc/sweeper) (or some other form of automation) to remove all empty or invalid geometries and duplicate records.
```

The SGID uses the ESRI default Resolution and Tolerance:

- XY Resolution: 0.0001 Meter
- XY Tolerance: 0.001 Meter

> ### OpenSGID

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Open SGID
```

Author: I have always used OpenSGID as a one-word brand name. Should I always be separating them into two words?

Reviewer 2: yeah, i think two words is 👍🏼

{: .text-left }

> All datasets in the SGID geodatabase are synced nightly with the [OpenSGID]({% link sgid/open-sgid/index.md %}) cloud-hosted PostGIS database. This open standards-centric database is accessible to anyone with an internet connection.

Reviewer 2: **thought**: remove implementation detail
```suggestion
All datasets in the SGID geodatabase are synced nightly with the [OpenSGID]({% link sgid/open-sgid/index.md %}). This open standards-centric database is accessible to anyone with an internet connection.
```

### Shelved Data
{: .text-left }

> We remove datasets from the SGID geodatabase that are no longer current but do have historical value (such as older Census/ACS data or previous arrangements of tax district boundaries). Their hosted feature services are tagged as `shelved` and placed in the public "AGRC Shelf" ArcGIS Online group for future reference.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We will remove datasets from the SGID that are no longer current but continue to have historical value (e.g., Census/ACS data or previous arrangements of tax district boundaries). Their hosted feature services will be tagged as `shelved` and placed in the public `AGRC Shelf` ArcGIS Online group for future reference.
```

### Dates in Table Names
{: .text-left }

Dates are acceptable in table names when content belongs in either the `census`, `political`, or `tax` ISO categories to identify datasets where the most current data may not reflect the current calendar year. For all other categories, dates should only be used for tables that are no longer effective/active or soon-to-be effective/active. This implies that the **most current and relevant** data contains **no date suffix**. Historical or future data _will_ contain a date suffix to help identification at a glance. The best way to learn about a dataset is to view the data page metadata.

## Updating and Editing Existing Datasets
{: .text-left }

> No edits will be made to the internal SGID from 7:00PM to 10:00AM MST to allow for automated scripts to push accurate updates to ArcGIS Online and ArcGIS Server. AGRC will ensure that data is production-ready before the editing windows ends.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
No edits will be made to the internal SGID from 7:00PM to 10:00AM MST to allow for automated scripts to push accurate updates to ArcGIS Online and ArcGIS Server. AGRC will ensure that data is production-ready before the editing window ends.
```

All database updates will be done during the editing window using [Swapper](https://github.com/agrc/swapper) or some other automated process to reduce the amount of time with incomplete data.

All data updates being pushed into the SGID will have removed empty geometries and duplicate records with [Sweeper](https://github.com/agrc/sweeper) or another automated process.

> All edits made to the internal SGID will be captured in the `Last update date` in the metadata, in the [SGID Update log](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/11ASS7LnxgpnD0jN4utzklREgMf1pcvYjcXcIcESHweQ/edit#gid=0), and as an update on the AGRC website data page.

Reviewer 3: **another nagging nitpick:** capitalize both "update" and "log", or neither

Author: Renaming to refer to the `Data Stewardship spreadsheet` to match earlier link title.

If making a schema change, please consider updating any domain descriptions that do not match the domain value. See this [document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/12bdtmtv-ZVF9g-lFshbobx8DbKX9LfbL44HawLjFTVw/edit?usp=sharing) to learn more about this effort.

## Removing SGID Datasets
{: .text-left }

> When deprecating data or services in the SGID, please follow the steps outlined in the [Porter](https://github.com/agrc/porter) project.

Reviewer 2: **thought**: maybe this isn't necessary any longer with the other review suggestions?

Author: I see what you're saying about Porter and I agree. I guess I'm still approaching this whole page with the mindset of "this is our policy for adding datasets to the internal SGID database." Thus, while Porter definitely handles a range of products, in the context of the page "datasets" makes more sense.
